docs: Add charm architecture (#696)
canonical/traefik-k8s-operator: docs/explanation/charm-architecture.md

---
myst:
  html_meta:

>     "description lang=en": "Learn more about the charm architecture of the Traefik charm."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "description lang=en": "Learn more about the architecture of the Traefik charm."
```
nit, to avoid using "charm" twice

---

> (explanation_charm_architecture)=

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(reference_charm_architecture)=
```
This suggestion only applies after reorganizing the document

# Charm architecture

At its core, [Traefik](https://traefik.io/traefik) is a [Go](https://go.dev/) application that 
provides both Layer 4 and Layer 7 traffic management, allowing applications to expose themselves outside their network boundary. The traefik-k8s charm deploys and manages Traefik as a Kubernetes ingress controller, routing requests from outside the cluster to Juju units and applications with support for TLS termination, path-based and subdomain-based routing, and much more.

## Charm architecture diagram

```{mermaid}
C4Container

System_Boundary(traefikcharm, "Traefik Charm") {

    Container_Boundary(traefik_container, "Traefik Workload Container") {
        Component(traefik_core, "Traefik", "Go Application", "Observes events, handles requests")
    }

    Container_Boundary(charm_container, "Charm Container") {
        Component(charm_logic, "Charm Logic", "Juju Operator Framework", "Controls application deployment & config")
    }
}

Rel(charm_logic, traefik_core, "Supervises<br>process")

UpdateRelStyle(charm_logic, traefik_core, $offsetX="-30")
```

> The charm design leverages the [sidecar](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2015/06/the-distributed-system-toolkit-patterns/#example-1-sidecar-containers) pattern to allow multiple containers in each pod with [Pebble](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/3.6/reference/pebble/) running as the workload container's entrypoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The charm design leverages the [sidecar](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2015/06/the-distributed-system-toolkit-patterns/#example-1-sidecar-containers) pattern to allow multiple containers in each pod with {ref}`Pebble <juju:pebble>` running as the workload container's entrypoint.
```

1. [`traefik_pebble_ready`](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/3.6/reference/hook/index.html#container-pebble-ready): fired on Kubernetes charms when the requested container is ready. **Action**: configure and start the Traefik workload, write static/dynamic configuration, and replan the Pebble service.

2. [`config_changed`](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/latest/reference/hook/index.html#config-changed): usually fired in response to a configuration change using the CLI. **Action**: regenerate Traefik static and dynamic configuration, update the Kubernetes LoadBalancer service, and restart the workload.

3. [`start`](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/latest/reference/hook/index.html#start): fired once when the unit is first started. **Action**: perform initial setup tasks for the charm.

4. [`stop`](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/latest/reference/hook/index.html#stop): fired when the unit is being stopped. **Action**: clean up resources.

5. [`remove`](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/latest/reference/hook/index.html#remove): fired when the unit is being removed. **Action**: clean up Kubernetes resources such as the LoadBalancer service.

> 6. [`update_status`](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/latest/reference/hook/index.html#update-status): fired at regular intervals. **Action**: validate the current state of the workload and update the charm status accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. {ref}`traefik-pebble-ready <juju:hook-container-pebble-ready>`: fired on Kubernetes charms when the requested container is ready. **Action**: configure and start the Traefik workload, write static/dynamic configuration, and replan the Pebble service.

2. {ref}`config-changed <juju:hook-config-changed>`: usually fired in response to a configuration change using the CLI. **Action**: regenerate Traefik static and dynamic configuration, update the Kubernetes LoadBalancer service, and restart the workload.

3. {ref}`start <juju:hook-start>`: fired once when the unit is first started. **Action**: perform initial setup tasks for the charm.

4. {ref}`stop <juju:hook-stop>`: fired when the unit is being stopped. **Action**: clean up resources.

5. {ref}`remove <juju:hook-remove>`: fired when the unit is being removed. **Action**: clean up Kubernetes resources such as the LoadBalancer service.

6. {ref}`update-status <juju:hook-update-status>`: fired at regular intervals. **Action**: validate the current state of the workload and update the charm status accordingly.
```
Updating the links to use intersphinx (should future-proof the links, especially since the Juju docs are migrating to a new URL soon). As far as I can tell, the hooks use dashes (`-`) instead of underscores (`_`), but please correct me if I'm mistaken!

7. [`certificate_available`](https://github.com/canonical/tls-certificates-interface): fired when a TLS certificate becomes available from the certificates provider. **Action**: store the certificate and reconfigure Traefik with TLS settings.

> 8. [`certificates_relation_broken`](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/latest/reference/hook/index.html#endpoint-relation-departed): fired when the TLS certificates relation is removed. **Action**: clean up TLS configuration and restart Traefik without TLS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. {ref}`certificates_relation_broken <juju:hook-relation-broken>`: fired when the TLS certificates relation is removed. **Action**: clean up TLS configuration and restart Traefik without TLS.
```
Note that you had linked the reference for `relation-departed`, which I think is different from the `relation-broken` hook? Please correct me if I'm mistaken!

Author: indeed thanks for catching

10. [`auth_config_changed`](https://github.com/canonical/oathkeeper-operator): fired when forward-auth configuration changes. **Action**: reconfigure the ForwardAuth middleware for all proxied routes.

11. [`auth_config_removed`](https://github.com/canonical/oathkeeper-operator): fired when forward-auth configuration is removed. **Action**: remove the ForwardAuth middleware from proxied routes.

12. [`ingress data_provided`](https://github.com/canonical/traefik-k8s-operator): fired when an ingress requirer provides routing data (applies to `ingress`, `ingress-per-unit`, and `ingress-per-app` relations). **Action**: generate dynamic routing configuration for the requesting application.

13. [`ingress data_removed`](https://github.com/canonical/traefik-k8s-operator): fired when an ingress requirer removes its routing data. **Action**: delete the corresponding dynamic routing configuration.

14. [`traefik_route ready`](https://github.com/canonical/traefik-k8s-operator): fired when a traefik-route charm provides raw Traefik configuration. **Action**: write the provided configuration to the dynamic config directory.

> 15. [`show_proxied_endpoints`](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/latest/user/reference/action/): fired when the `show-proxied-endpoints` action is run. **Action**: display all currently configured ingress routes.

Reviewer: Nit: Since this hook is fired due to a specific action, maybe we should link directly to the action instead of the Juju reference page:
```suggestion
15. [`show_proxied_endpoints`](https://charmhub.io/traefik-k8s/actions#show-proxied-endpoints): fired when the `show-proxied-endpoints` action is run. **Action**: display all currently configured ingress routes.
```
Otherwise, if you think we should link to the Juju docs, I recommend we use an intersphinx reference:
```suggestion
15. {ref}`show-proxied-endpoints <juju:action>`: fired when the `show-proxied-endpoints` action is run. **Action**: display all currently configured ingress routes.
```

> > See more in the Juju docs: [Hook](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/latest/reference/hook/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> See more in the Juju docs: {ref}`juju:hook`
```
We can also use an admonition for this note like:

````
```{note}
See more in the Juju docs: {ref}`juju:hook`
```
````

## Charm code overview

The `src/charm.py` is the default entry point for a charm and has the `TraefikIngressCharm` Python class which inherits from `CharmBase`. `CharmBase` is the base class from which all charms are formed, defined by [Ops](https://ops.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) (Python framework for developing charms).

> > See more in the Juju docs: [Charm](https://documentation.ubuntu.com/juju/latest/user/reference/charm/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> See more in the Juju docs: {ref}`juju:charm`
```
We can also use an admonition for this note like:
````
```{note}
See more in the Juju docs: {ref}`juju:charm`
```
````
